---
layout: post
title: The Lighthouse
published: false
---

In Robert Eggers' latest film _The Lighthouse_ both story and setting are stripped down to the essentials: there is a remote lighthouse off the coast; two men are sent on a four-week shift to oversee it; one, Thomas Wake, an old hand (Willem Dafoe) and the other, Ephraim Winslow, a young newcomer (Robert Pattinson). When their replacements never arrive, they are forced to ration their supplies and subsequently descend into a drunken madness admist a tempest. The spartan setup gives a lot of room for the two actors to roam, but also a lot of rope to hang themselves. Pattinson's performance is impassioned, if uneven; Dafoe is the one who manages to keep the whole thing from blowing away in the wind. Eggers' interest with atmosphere and world-building shines through, and one can feel the quest for authenticity in the compact, grainy film treatment, the heavy clanking lighthouse machinery, the way the characters dress and speak, and everything in between. However, granting these raw materials were there to begin with, ultimately the film's ability to synthesize them into something interesting is hamstrung by a relentless desire to challenge, subvert, and flagellate.

---

The wide theatrical release of _The Lighthouse_ was buoyed by press a certain kind of film attracts these days: a cycle of retellings of its origin story and laborious production---notably, the construction of an actual lighthouse on a piece of barren rock in Nova Scotia---as well as the various hijinks of its two leading men. Robert Pattinson claimed he punched himself in the face and drank mud before scenes. The film's legend preceeded it in a manner similar to Iñárritu's _The Revenant_, also infamous for its grueling on-location shooting, dogmatic realism, and debasement of its own star, DiCaprio. In both cases, the mechanics of the film's production possibly arouses more fascination and accolades than the film itself, a trend that has recently found footing with films shot on an iPhone, featuring non-actors or real-life relationships, or utilizing advanced CGI-assisted cat fur. The dual character of an unusual production choice is that it can both make an artistic statement more effective and serve as kindling for the ever-important "buzz" that can make a release critically (if not financially) successful. The danger is in the film being too fashionable for its own good.

From the first moment in _The Lighthouse_, a few such unique aesthetic decisions with regards to the cinematography are clear: the film is in black and white, it's gritty, and it's in a narrow aspect ratio. Eggers used actual black and white film stock as opposed to applying such an effect in post-production, a decision that required incredible intensity of lighting to prevent underexposure. Combined with lenses designed in the 1910s and 1930s, the result is an effect that most viewers would simply describe as "old-looking". But one wonders if the utility of the approach extends beyond the generation of "did-you-know?"-style factoids. The modified aspect ratio certainly recalls productions of a long bygone era, and while it is used to some effect in sequences such as a close-cropped vertical boom shot up the length of the lighthouse's exterior, the constrained frame feels gimmicky, as they often do.

The narrative style Eggers employs in the script likewise seems designed to provoke a reaction. As if aware of its own aesthetic preoccupations, the film undercuts itself, regularly featuring crude humor around flatulence and feces but also disrupting dramatic energy with lazy punchlines, such as Wake's lengthy condemnation of Winslow around the latter's insult to his cooking; the intensity of Dafoe's performance in this scene (already canonized as a meme, with those in the know additionally parroting the fact that Dafoe reportedly performed the scene in just one take) is immediately evaporated by Winslow's retort that, OK, maybe the food isn't that bad. Moments like this are frustrating because they show that something much stronger could have arisen out of the combination of setting, cast, and narrative seed. Instead, the film treats dramatic energy frivolously. While the mixing of humor and horror is of course not intrinsically a mistake and genre-blending or genre-defying films are possible and often interesting, this film reads as merely self-deprecating, using laughs to perhaps disguise a lack of confidence in where to go from here. Eggers' wife perhaps said it best: "I don't think this is as funny as you think it is."<sup>[2]</sup>

Mythology and the supernatural are central to Eggers' acclaimed 2015 film _The Witch_ (also a period horror, set in a desolate 1620's New England wilderness), and he carries this focus into _The Lighthouse_, drawing this time from the influence of Greek mythology on seafarer lore. Much of Wake's dialog, calling forth Triton, Proteus, Poseidon and the like, seems at times plucked straight from Melville and in fact this is even cheekily referenced by Winslow, who becomes fed up with Wake's "Captain Ahab horseshit". Though sound from a historical perspective---the film's events take place a few decades after the publication of _Moby Dick_, though the idea of these two characters being aware of the book or its characters requires a bit of imagination---the remark serves as joke shared with the audience and needlessly undermines the film's carefully constructed façade.

The lighthouse itself of course carries heavy symbolism, though it is seemingly deliberately unclear of what precisely. It's phallic of course, but the film additionally imbues it with obsession, salvation, purity and truth. Mermaids, curses, bad omens and other totems of sailor superstition add additional weight and confusion to the central conflict. Is Winslow being haunted due to a sinful event from his past? Is his hubris and entitlement what ultimately leads him to be divinely punished? Or is everything imagined as a byproduct of the madness of isolation? Eggers didn't let the actors in on what was "real" and what was not, hoping that such ambiguity would be reflected in the performance and thus the interpretation.

Such ambiguity can be a very powerful tool in a film and often adds to a film's longevity, however in this case it seems the material is spread too thin; there are simply too many possible directions and forces at play. A more coherent focus on a few of the disparate elements, such as the Proteus/Prometheus interplay, which is the strongest material in the film, could have brought it all together in a more effective manner. In the end, the story settles on the light at the top of the tower, a force somehow connected with Wake's character and with which both Wake and Winslow are enamored. Winslow decides to take the light for himself, yet faces divine wrath for it, a fate recalling Icarus more than Prometheus, and one anybody who has seen _Raiders of the Lost Ark_ is already familiar with. To drive the point (or some point in any event) home, the film finishes with Winslow, now explicitly Prometheus incarnate, stripped naked on the rocks, being disembowled by the gulls. Ironically, Winslow's fate is not unlike the film itself: its hubris is its downfall. Wake's dying lament is thus all the more tragic:

> _O, what Protean forms swim up from men’s minds and melt in hot Promethean plunder, scorching eyes with divine shames and horror, and casting them down to Davy Jones. The others, still blind, yet in it see all the divine graces, and to Fiddler’s Green sent, where no man is suffered to want and toil, but is ancient, mutable, and unchanging, as the she who girdles around the globe._

[1]: https://www.vox.com/culture/2019/10/15/20914097/robert-eggers-lighthouse-interview-witch
[2]: https://filmmakermagazine.com/108449-a-black-and-white-movie-in-a-stupid-aspect-ratio-robert-eggers-on-the-lighthouse/
[3]: https://variety.com/2019/film/features/robert-pattinson-batman-the-lighthouse-1203319866/

